A Wasteland of rubble the UN says
clearing the debris from Israel's war on
Gaza will be a huge challenge that could
take 14 years an exploded ammunition
will also make this a dangerous task so
what will this mean for the millions of
Palestinians who hope to return to their
homes this is Inside Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm
fully batibo unprecedented levels of
Destruction that's how the UN describes
the state of Gaza since Israel's War
began in October no buildings have been
spared from the Israeli strikes homes
schools mosques hospitals damaged or
destroyed the un's mine Action Agency
says that after more than 6 months of
devastating War 37 million tons of
debris now L to the strip clearing it
will take more than a decade and will
likely be slowed down by the unexploded
bombs and ammunitions cared throughout
Gaza for Palestinians living among the
rubble in the densely populated
territory that makes for an even more
dangerous environment and once the war
is over will it be safe for people to
return and rebuild their homes we'll put
that to our guest shortly but first this
report from imagin
Kimber in 6 months Israel's war on Gaza
has killed more than 34,000 people and
caused unprecedented destruction nearly
300,000 homes have been flattened
Heritage sites are in Ruins all
universities have been destroyed or
damaged and hospitals and government
buildings have been reduced to
Rubble along with the devastation to
people's lives there's enormous amounts
of debris which includes unexploded
Munitions and will require a huge amount
of cleanup we estimate 30 37 million
tons of of
debris which is approximately 300 kilos
of debris per square
meter the UN says at least 10% of
ammunition that is fired fails to
function considering the sheer level of
bombardment Israel has rained down on
Gaza there may be thousands of
unexploded bombs in the rubble making
the work long and dangerous we're
talking about 14 years of work with 100
trucks so that's based on that figure 14
years to remove uh with approximately
750,000 work days uh person work days to
remove the debris the cost of removal
will likely be in the tens of millions
of dollars according to the mines
Advisory Group clearing urban areas is
harder than rural areas and some of the
weapons used like aircraft drop bombs
and precision guided missiles can be
difficult to remove and during the
cleanup Gaza will remain a danger zone
nearly 2 million people are internally
displaced in Gaza desperate to return to
their
homes we struggled a lot going from one
place to another this is the third time
we are relocating from RAF to kanun and
now to Der balah there is no safety
anywhere we are civilians and have not
done anything wrong we are tired find us
a
solution but rebuilding homes and
resuming daily life will likely be
delayed by the many risks facing
Palestinians Gaza has been here before
but not on this scale and after every
war sweeping for Munitions has been
necessary but this time it may leave
great SES of the small densely populated
strip uninhabitable long after the war
is over imagin Kimber Al jazer for
Inside
Story let's now bring in our guests for
today's show in Geneva we have have
Jonathan Guthrie director of operations
at the Norwegian people's Aid in Aman
Federico Desi mle East director at the
NGO humanity and inclusion and in ramala
in the occupied West Bank Raja khidi
director general of the Palestine
Economic Policy Research Institute
gentlemen a warm welcome to you all
thank you for joining us on Inside Story
Federico inam man let me start with you
because you were in Gaza just last month
in March prior to October 7th how many
how many unexploded Munitions would you
expect to find in Gaza and how much uh
has a danger posed by these weapons
increased since the start of the war on
October
7th I think well before the before 7 the
number of ammunition was relatively low
I think the of course there have been
several Wars and offensive in Gaza
before before this one but they were on
a smaller scale the the second largest
one was in 14 and that caused the
extensive destruction but still we
estimated the number of unlo orance that
will be present at the end of this
current war will probably be between
five and 10 times higher than what we
could see in 2014 and then the after
month yeah will it be possible you think
to know the full extent of the
contamination caused by the current
conflict it's very difficult to have
perfect estimates I mean we are working
on a we have a working assumption that
there there's been something between
50,000
100,000 bombs dropped on on Gaza and
shells dropped on Gaza over the past six
seven months and the number is growing
by the day unfortunately until assess
fire will be place and then between 9%
and 14% those are the technical
estimates of these bombs um didn't go
off so potentially we're talking about
several thousands potentially up to
10,000 or a bit more um of unexploded
bombs and shells and M
rounds in
Gaza briefly F Federico before I bring
in Jonathan you were in Gaza last month
as I as I mentioned what what did you
witness while you were there what was
the situation because of course we
describe it we see the pictures on
television on a daily basis but how did
you did you imagine that it would be as
bad as we see it on our screens
it's the worst situation I've seen in 18
years of humanitarian career um there
are two kinds of areas in in Gaza there
are areas that are flattened where like
most buildings have been damaged or
destroyed and there is an exploding
orance under rubble and also lying in
the streets and empty terrains and then
you have those areas that have been
targeted less intensively where most of
the population is now uh regrouping you
know Rafa and and the coast of Rafa in
the middle area where there are hundreds
of thousand people crammed into um
tented settlements or camps on along the
beach and then schools that have been
turned into shelters and still you see
many buildings flattened or damaged by
her strikes because air strikes are
happening everywhere even in those areas
where the population has fled indeed the
air strikes are happening even in areas
which the Israelis had said were were
safe for the people uh Jonathan let me
bring you into the conversation uh
you've worked extensively in Syria and
Iraq and know you know that these
weapons these uh unexploded uh
ammunitions are a huge concern of course
for civilian population but for a place
like Gaza with one of the highest
concentration of of uh civilians living
in an area a densely populated area just
how dangerous is it what what's the
impact of these unexploded ammunitions
on people who live in Gaza yeah thank
you very much for having me today um
yeah I think you you've hit the nail on
the head when you were talking about
Gaza because of the sheer density of the
bombing and uh in such a small area uh
that we have in Gaza we've seen you know
up to 50,000 uh explosive ordinance
especially large aircraft bombs being
dropped and 90% of the Munitions that
have been used in Gaza have been large
aircraft bombs 1,000 or 2,000 lb uh
aircraft bombs and uh and this can cause
a
quite a significant threat to the to the
local community um you know taking some
of the lessons learned that we've seen
from uh from from from the Iraq and and
Syria conflicts is that you know we we
really need to have a kind of a
two-pronged approach to to the response
there's a response that is required to
support uh the rubble removal debris
removal and reconstruction but there's
also the response to supporting uh local
civilians um and and we really need to
be able to educate the local uh
civilians and communities especially
those out of camps um and provide them
with the education and uh on on the
risks that these Munitions pose because
because they educate how do you educate
uh Jonathan those civilians when they
are experiencing War when they're in the
middle of a war I mean we've seen people
even during this conflict trying to
return to their homes because you know
they want to find food and so on are
people being being warned currently as
the war is ongoing on about the dangers
they
face yes they are actually MPA is uh is
is quite heavily involved in this
providing education both through the
camps but also the the outof camp uh
population um and and teaching them what
explosive ordinance look like and how to
respond when when we find them I think
the situation that we have at the moment
is there is no kind of coordinated
response mechanism to uh to to respond
when the local population does find
these Munitions and that probably won't
come into effect until until the end of
the conflict okay I and I'll come back
to you in a minute federo to ask you
about what you think the response should
be Raja khin ramala let me bring you
into the conversation now we've seen
buildings and civilian infrastructure
completely destroyed in Gaza systems of
water and sanitation housing schools
hospitals and so on do you think Gaza
will still be habitable when this war
ends
well from the first days of the war our
own research was more or less all
grouped under the understanding that
this War's aim was to make Gaza
uninhabitable uh and as an econom uh
monitoring the economic and social
impacts everything has just
confirmed in different at different
stages from the domicide that we've seen
uh uh to what is it now 2third of the
residential
stock of the north I believe uh to the
you know weaponizing of of food uh and
starvation and epid epidem asde and
scolastici side we cannot you know keep
up really so that's the first point
certainly we now have a much and I think
that's I want to just you know picking
up from your previous speakers you know
I we started looking at 2014 as a
comparator uh in assessing economic
impact and assessing destruction but
we've since concluded and started
thinking in terms of 1945 is the
comparator uh this is a total
Destruction this is total devastation
the World Bank report on the different
sectors housing health education
cultural heritage the billions that they
have suffered uh and the billions in
some cases or half you know half a
million half a billion dollars Health uh
facil facilities alone and that's like
like 70% of Health Facilities so that
sort of scale is UN unheard of and I
just want to also say that this question
of rubble and Dearing it's extremely
important and and and thinking about
these details is something that we need
to start doing more of because you know
in fact the the unexploded ordinance
from the last Wars was a major part of
hamas's Arsenal so I'm sure that the
Israelis going to need to you know and
this is the problem you know uh we don't
want to get into a situation where we
create mechanisms which prolong Israeli
occupation so the fact that there's an
international concern about Dearing and
and and and quickly getting this
ordinance out of the way so that the
rubble clearance can begin that's in
itself questions of months so time and
scale of rubble removal is a huge huge
subject yeah and so then uh Federico how
how does the clearing even begin when
the war is still going on when you look
at the destruction of the heavy
infrastructure there's been is it
possible to know first of all the types
of ammunitions that have been used and
what is going what it's going to take to
clear them what the response should look
like yeah so in terms of typ of
ammunition what our teams are seeing on
the ground is a um air drop weapons very
large mk84 so 900 kilo
bombs um and then there are there's a
mix of Tong shells mortar rounds and
then some air to surface
missiles um most of them
of
American production used by the isra
Army um what what do we what will it
take to uh to clear all these and make
the Gaza Strip safe again for civilians
first of all we need a ceasefire uh
because that's the only way to operate
safely and reach all the areas of the
Gaza Strip especially those that have
been more heavily bound and were people
have fled and would like to go back as
soon as possible uh second we need
unimpeded access we need
authorizations from the Israeli
authorities and from any other concerned
authority to bring inside equipment and
to do the work uh not only of
identifying the kind of weapons used and
marking those weapons which is something
that our teams as Humanity inclusion are
already doing but hopefully in the
future also be able to diffuse these
items uh detonate them and remove them
for good um working under the r will
require specialized equipment
armored um caterpillars or
excavators so very specialized equipment
and a big eff that cannot be carried out
during an active War within a CE fire
indeed and that ceasefire is needed and
even when there is a ceasefire when the
wars stop the issue of access is key
isn't it uh Jonathan as feder Rico
mentioned there uh accessing these areas
and also getting the equipment in uh
Jonathan what do you think the process
should be uh when it comes to you know
uh uh clearing uh these uh ammunition
and these weapons from the Gaza Strip
and who should be involved yeah I think
it should be a coordinated and uh
collaborative typ effort where uh it's a
un Le Mission it should be a un Le
coordinated Mission but uh using the
resources that um that Civil Society can
can can bring uh in the past we've seen
uh we've seen responses we've seen
construction racing ahead of mine action
uh we we really need to bring the mine
action community and experts into uh the
planning the assessment phases so there
needs to be experts that are attached to
assessment missions when going in and
looking towards how we're going to plan
the Reconstruction and the debris
removal and bringing in those expertise
at the earliest possible stage will
prevent uh you know um um delays in in
the future so I mean I think we we
really need to to have that in place we
really need to have a strong information
management system in place uh again most
likely to be un Le so that we can really
map out the contamination map out
exactly what type of ordinance we're
finding and what response is is
appropriate um but I would like to just
Echo what the previous speaker spoke
about and and access is really an issue
at the moment and getting Access
Equipment uh is is essential because
there's not much that the M action
Community can do do if they don't have
the appropriate equipment to be able to
render safe these Munitions yeah access
is an issue indeed because I mean we
we've seen that even Aid hasn't been
able to get to to to G through to the
Gaza Strip and especially in the
Northern areas of the Gaza Strip um just
on on the humanitarian impact Jonathan
let me ask you a little bit more because
we haven't touched on that the types of
injuries that people are are sustaining
as a result of these uh weapons that are
being used what types are they and how
just difficult is it going to treat them
not just now but in the long term what
impact is it going to have on on the
civilian population of Gaza yeah it's
going to have a massive impact on the
civilian uh civilian Community within
within Gaza um I mean we can talk about
the you know the physical impact but but
more concerning is probably the the
mental health and and psychological
support and impact that it's going to
have on the and has already had on the
people of Gaza um I mean we really we
really need to be uh to be addressing
this um and we really need to be
thinking about how to support now
because you know people that are
suffering from this kind of mental
health and
Trauma more likely to take risk um we'll
see greater levels of risk being taken
when people do return and uh and then
that's going to actually cause more and
more physical you know injuries uh in
the future as people do return so I
think that really needs to be addressed
now and uh and and then you know we're
going to see very very typical uh type
of explosive injuries which could be uh
you know obviously fatal uh but loss of
Limbs uh in general Burns Etc right uh
Raja let me come back to you and uh
hopefully get your economic expertise on
all this even with the ga with the war
still going on in Gaza some people are
already talking and imagining
reconstruction rebuilding Gaza there's
already talk about of that how much is
it going to take how complicated and how
expensive will it be to C Gaza and how
much Global funding is there at the
moment for for Deming efforts that we've
been talking
about well the Deming efforts are a
critical and early uh act action that
needs to be dealt with and some of the
points that we mentioned are extremely
important uh uh however uh regrettably
it's probably going the cost it's the
least costly one uh and perhaps you know
in the right circumstances something
that can be dealt with relatively easily
compared to uh uh the Reconstruction now
I mean when we talk about reconstruction
we've started talking about
reconstruction all we've been able to do
as Palestinians so far is really chart
the extent of damage so the most recent
World Bank uh report was only the first
four months of the of the of the War uh
since then we've had terrible terrible
uh destruction in the center so that was
an $8.5 billion estimate which so now
we're talking closer to
2025 now that's the sort of uh uh
numbers that only reparations and
Marshall plan type Regional
International uh funding can can handle
so that's certainly one issue but the
other issue I think is also the staging
and the organizing of all of this and
the fact that uh we need to be careful
that not only the UN agencies are not
replaced by uh non-un let's say uh
players in the relief effort and in the
maritime corner for example and other
things but also that the Palestinians
are the leading the Reconstruction
vision you know you know where do you go
with the rubble do we use it to expand
to make a new Gaza it's extremely
critical and pro you know sensitive
subject to be honest a very sensitive
subject on who will have the authority
and on and who who will have the
authority and resources to rebuild Gaza
right absolutely well the authority pres
in principle the P the PA still will
have that Authority once it's it
continues to reform it it's and and
prepare for this it has a reconstruction
agency that's where it should be housed
but the World Bank will be involved
Regional donors will have to step
about you know is well if we you know
the the principle of reparations you
know something we have to talk about
going back to 1948 if we can start with
the 2023 war and and and and pin them
down on that then the other ones might
be you know but that's something we
shouldn't forget this is not the first
time Israel has caused un you know unold
un un incalculable damage which it never
has been held responsible for uh
compensating all right feder Rico in a
man your thoughts looking ahead to
reconstruction how big of a gap do you
think there'll be between what's needed
right now given you know what Gaza has
experienced and the funding the funds
that will be
available I it's hard to say as our
colleague was saying the bill keeps
increasing month after month as
destruction piles
up for us at Humanity inclusion already
the priority is to address the immediate
humanitarian needs now and you were
talking about before we have
seen thousands of people have suffered
from amputations um there are tens of
thousand people have suffer from
injuries and require not just immediate
surgery but also nursing care and
physiotherapy Rehabilitation you know
sometimes weeks and months after after
their their blessure their um their
injury and
um and then looking at reconstruction I
think it's it's important to start
planning now but we are still far from
from from that moment we we need and I
think the International Community needs
to address the root causes of this
conflict we need to make sure this
conflict is the last one if there is no
real solution that creates stability and
dignity for the Palestinians and
security for the whole region including
Israel uh then there cannot be true
reconstruction because the amount of
money required will be very high the
number of years will be you know five 10
years at least and uh and no actor
agency will invest in that unless
they're sure that this is something
stable we invest now for the next 10
years but then there's a future of peace
and prosperity for for Gaza and for
Palestine in the region after that
Jonathan your thoughts the eventual
reconstruction of Gaza will no doubt be
a Monumental task you know how important
will it be to have a a really solid
process in place and what should be the
priorities because rebuilding the
infrastructure is important but as we
heard treating the people also of Gaza
who've experienced who who you know been
victims of this conflict and who' have
experienced really severe injuries will
also be uh
key yeah and it's going to be very
difficult to prioritize I mean generally
speaking the International Community
will have allocated funding that will
will go to both areas so there'll be
there'll be that that supports uh
clearance and and in uh in effect that
support the Reconstruction but also
there'll be uh other sources of funding
that will be directed towards supporting
uh uh civilians and and victims so I I
think between between those two and
between the different funding sources we
can we can separate um quite easily and
um yeah and I mean I think as I
mentioned before assessments are
essential and until we until we get
access and understand uh the extent of
the contamination then uh it's very very
difficult to to understand exactly how
the best or what is the best approach um
in traditional mind clearance you know
we can go and do surveys we can map out
areas and then we can have a proactive
approach to to clearance and that might
be the case in in some parts of Gaza but
in other parts it might be a more
responsive approach as people return
there's a response mechanism in place
for what they find it could be having
educate will we will need to educate all
workers everybody that comes back into
Gaza will need to be educated on the
risks that these pose and and then we
can have also mine action experts that
are sitting on standby or supporting uh
reconstruction teams or Rubble removal
teams right um so it's going to be a
combination of of of different
approaches I think depending on which
part of the the of Gaza that we're going
to be operating in yeah Jonathan I
wanted to ask you about you know some of
the types of the weapons that have been
used and apparently they include the
controversial um incendiary white
phosphorus which can seep into water
supplies I understand so the
consequences of all this will be long
lasting I mean how do you address that
yeah I mean the the use of incendiary
weapons is isn't isn't new to uh to to
conflict but um using it on this level
in in populated areas is uh is quite
unprecedented um and and the the
environmental impact that it will have
as it leaks as you mentioned leaks Into
Water Systems Etc um will need a
completely different response uh and and
something that the M action sector
hasn't really worked on uh in in great
detail previously although there are
initiatives in place at the moment that
are already looking at it and tests and
trials have been conducted on how we
could potentially uh Clean Water
Supplies from explosive residues and and
things so that again this is just such a
complex environment that we're that that
we're walking into and uh and it's
unprecedented it's it's something that
we we've never really seen before on
this scale an unprecedented situation no
doubt Raja khidi in rala I'll give you
the last word what should be the best
approach what should be the the strategy
for for reconstruction and what should
decision makers you think consider when
when they move forward well first things
first I think and we've already heard
about some of those first things so I
mean there's a very logical sequence of
what you need to be what needs to be
done this year and what can be done and
what needs to be done next year and what
might be possible given resources and
this year it's about it's about
emergency relief which is costing
around3 to3 and half billion dollars a
year it's about temporary shelter which
nobody has yet even started putting in
place for up to a bill a million
displaced people it's you know next year
is about and it's about Rubble removal
hopefully starting and these other
immediate then you have a whole new
stage next year which is when you can
perhaps people can start building again
but even then you need something to
boost the private economy people cannot
after this sort of trauma Mass trauma
and the lack of services the slow return
of services cannot be expected to S to
go back to work you know and do their
thing so we need a a scheme something
like a universal emergency Universal
basically income scheme so at least you
know before we start to rebuild we need
10 billion in the next year or so and
that's you know even that's daunting in
the lack as everybody said in the lack
of a ceasefire in the lack of a
political process and in the lack of
Palestinians taking charge of this Pro
process and not it not being mortgage to
Regional powers or even you know with
all due respect the international
agencies which have been doing a
brilliant job our absence thank you
gentlemen for a very interesting
discussion Jonathan gri Federico Desi
and Raja khidi thank you very much for
joining us on Inside Story and thank you
too for watching you can always watch
this program again anytime by visiting
our website. ala.com for further
discussion go to our Facebook page
that's facebook.com/ AJ insid story of
course you can join the conversation on
X our handle is at AJ inside story from
me fi btio and the whole team here in
Doha thank you for watching bye for now
[Music]